++
title : chapter 1 GEOGRAPHICAL BASIS
++


(I) Location  
THE group of hills lying in the shape of a coil called the Tirumala hills,  forms a feature of the region of South India between the 13th and 14th degrees  of north latitude and east longitude 79 degrees.  
The Tirumalai range has seven principal peaks, each of them sacred,  and each of them bearing a separate name accounted for by a fable. Near  one of them, namely Seshachalam, stands the Tirumala temple and the whole  range is often called after this principal peak.  
The Eastern Ghats which, from the northern extremity of the state, run  close to the coast, turn into the interior after passing the river Krishna, and  then break up into a number of parallel ranges of hills, of which, in the region  south of the Krishna and extending southwards to the latitude of Madras,  say roughly 13th degree of north latitude, three parallel ranges are  distinguishable. The range nearest the coast runs more or less straight in  one single range. The second range is an irregular group starting from the  Krishna well below Kumool, and runs down in a semicircle into the Cuddapah  District scattering about in a cluster, one group of which is called Seshachalam  hills; the main range however runs southwards till it makes a further approach  to the coast, coming down as far as Ponneri, a few miles north of Madras.  The third range, more irregular and much lower in point of height, proceeds  northwards from the foot of the Mysore plateau and scatters itself through  Anantapur and Kurnool districts. The central group is what is called  Nallamalais in the Kurnool District, and, as it proceeds southwards from  there, it becomes more definitely something like a single range, and meets  the Eastern range round about the group of hills at Tirupati, Kalahasti, etc  These hills therefore form a feature of the frontier half a degree to the north  of Madras, extending the whole length from the Mysore plateau and stretching  eastwards to almost near the coast at Ponneri, and thus constitute a prominent  feature of the south extremity of Andhra Pradesh.The Hill is but a part of the mountain range designated as the Eastern  Ghats. It may be taken to start from the Anamalais in the extreme south  and to traverse the Coimbatore District, the eastern frontier of Mysore  territory, through the Salem and the present North Arcot Districts, before  entering the Chittoor District at Palamaner. It takes a direction somewhat  east of north up to the Talakona Water Falls, where there is a deflection towards  the east till it reaches Tirumala To the east of Tirumala it ends in a gap  The length of this bit of the Eastern Ghats is about 12 miles between  Talakona and Tirumala, as the crow flies The actual forest path along the  crest of the Hill may be about 20 miles This portion seems to have been  considered very holy from time immemorial. As evidence of this, we see  even today that the Kona (water course) commencing from the Talakona  falls on the extreme west is called the Papavinasanam Kona. The water  course of the eastern end is also called the Papavinasam Kona.  
The Talakona Falls and the Vagu seem to be the natural result of the  wrench which the Hill was subjected to by the sharp tum from north to east.  The level of the hill on the north is about 3,583 feet, east and south about  3,800 feet The waterfall itself which is perennial is about 200 feet The  level country to the west of the hill, is about 1,800 to 2,000 feet above sea  level The valley contains luxuriant ever green forests and presents a good  natural scenery The hill has a sharp slope towards the plains. There is  an ancient Siddheswara shrine on the plains, close to the hill on the west.  This waterfall, being the first one on the hill, is known as the Talakona falls.  
This constituted the ancient border between the Tamil country in the  South and Vadugu, by which name the modern Kannada and Telugu speaking  region, to its north, was then known. Vengadam or the Tirumala hill was a  prominent outpost of this border. The Puranas compare the central range,  mentioned above, to a huge recumbent serpent, and locate the Mallikarjuna  temple of Srisailam on its tail, the Narasimha temple of Ahobilam on its back,  the Sri Venkateswara temple of Tirumala on the back of the hood, and the  Kalahastisvara temple of Kalahasti at the opening of the mouth.  
Tirupati and Tiruchanur are located on a big circular plain surrounded  by a chain of hills on all sides. The Tirumala hills form the northern part  of this  chain and the  town of Tirupati is about two miles to the south of these  hills.  
The hill on which the temple of Sri Venkateswara stands, popularly known  as Venkatachala, is low and surrounded by many hills of a higher altitude,  as is the case with the hill on which is located the Mallikarjuna temple of  Srisailam. There are five well-known paths leading to the temple. Of them,  two routes start from the town of Tirupati, the stepped pathway, seven miles  long, and the motor road, twelve miles long. The third route is from Chandragiri. The fourth starts from the Mamandur Railway Station and  the fifth passes by Nagapatla.  
Intimately associated with the temple of Tirumala are two konas on the  Hill. One is called the Papavinasam (obviously the eastern one) and the  other the Avachari vanka. The former drains the part of the Hill which may  be said to be to the north of the temple and the latter the part to the south,  rather south east, of it. Both are important on account of the many sacred  Tirthams thereon.  
(II) Topography  
The physical geography of Tirumala, like its social economy, typifies  the interaction of the Tamil and Telugu cultures of South India. The dominant  topographical feature of Tirumala is the secluded hill top on which the temple  is built. As a matter of fact this has been referred to in the following words  used in Silappadhikaram:  
" Venkadamennum Enguyar Malaiyath thuchimimisai"  
This notion that the Lord was named as " Uchchiyilninran" (He who  stands on the summit) appears to have persisted as a legacy of the tradition  till the middle of the 13th Century. The realisation that the temple was  actually on a much lower level than its surroundings became more general  in later days.  
The temple rises to 3,426 feet. A little further near the Jabali Tirtham  the level is 3177 feet. To the East the hill rises from about 2250 ft. to 2750 ft.;  to the South to 2920 ft. and in the South west the Narayanagiri rises to 3,620 ft.  
The western parts of the Chittoor district in which Tirumala is situated  form the rugged eastern scarps of the Mysore Plateau with Gneissic rocks.  Eastwards of the plateau are numerous clusters of detached hills some of  considerable size and elevation. In the eastern parts of the area, the Cuddapah  geological formations occur. The southern end of the Veligondas, the  Tirumala hills including the Mamandur valley forests, contain a succession  of shales, quartzites etc. The tremendous lines of scarp and often vertical  cliffs seen in the Seshachalam range of hills give a peculiar and grand character  to the local landscape  
(III) Climate  
The climate is on the whole dry and agreeable. The year is divided  into four seasons. December to February is dry and cool. March to  May is summer followed by the South West monsoon from June to September.  October and November is the post monsoon retreating period, the average  rainfall being 8 to 7.5 mm. (32.58').  
(IV) Rainfall  
The annual rainfall is between 34 and 35 inches. The rainfall during  the monsoon period from June to September constitutes only 44% of the  annual normal rainfall. During May there is some significant amount of  rainfall mostly in the form of thunder showers. During the post monsoon  season as much as 35 % of the annual rainfall is received. The period from  August to November is the chief rainy season, October being the rainiest  month. The variation in the rainfall from year to year is very large.  
The valleys of the tract on the whole are fairly healthy. In the Tirupati  range the climate is very unhealthy, and till recently a residence of even a  few days ensured an attack of malaria fever.  
The rainfall is rather precarious in Chittoor District where Tirumala is located and the district is constantly subject to drought and famine. Most  of the precipitation occurs in the North-East monsoon while it is less in the South-West monsoon. The western taluks of Vayalpad, Madanapalli, Punganur,  Palamaner and Kuppam are the worst taluks constantly subject to famine.  Whenever there are depressions in the Bay of Bengal nearer to Madras  coast, the district gets good rain under their influence.  
(V) Temperature
The annual temperature ranges from 18° to 42° C. The period from about  the middle of November to the middle of February is the coolest part of the  year. In December when the mean temperature is the lowest, the mean  daily maximum temperature is 25.3°C (77.5°F) and the mean daily minimum  is 15.4°C (59.7°F). After February the temperature begins to rise rapidly.  April and May are the hottest months with a mean daily maximum  temperature of 34.5°C (94.6°F). The nights are slightly hotter in May than  in April, the mean daily minimum in May being 23.9°C (75.0°F). Thunder  showers which occur on some days during the afternoon of April and May  bring welcome relief. With the onset of the SouthWest monsoon by about  the first week of June, day temperature decreases a little and the weather  in the whole of the south west and post monsoon season is more agreeable  than in the summer season. Night temperature decreases after October.  
(VI )Humidity  
The relative humidity is about 70% to 80% in the morning and about  60% to 65% in the afternoons during the period from July to December.  It decreases thereafter. The driest part of the year is the period from February  to May when the relative humidities in the afternoons are between 25 % to 40 %.  
(vii) Cloudiness
During the period from June to November, skies are moderately and  heavily clouded and overcast for a few days. During the rest of the year  the skies are clear or highly clouded.  
(VIII) Winds  
Winds are generally light and blow mainly from directions between  south-west and north-west during the period from May to September; for  the rest of the year, winds are light and variable in the morning. Afternoon winds are stronger, and in the period from October to January, they are mainly  north westerly or easterly; in the next three months, afternoon winds are mostly  from direction between east and north  
(IX) Geological Formations  
The geological formation of the area is of three kinds. The Jewadis,  the Eastern Ghats, and the spurs passing from them-belong to the gneissic  or metamorphic series, and this formation underlies, and occasionally crops  up from beneath, the level plains of the south-east. The hills present a bare  and rugged appearance, being rarely covered with more than a stunted scrub  jungle. Long coarse grass grows everywhere among the rocks, affording  pasturage to the miserable village cattle during the cool season, but during  the dry months the rocks are parched and useless. The villagers then set fire to  the grass, and the conflagrations rapidly spreading destroys the withered blades  and form a fresh soil, from which at the advent of the rains new shoots spring  up. The stunted jungle naturally suffers from such rough treatment, and  wood sufficiently large for building purposes can only be cut in a few localities.  
Associated with the gneissic deposits are found enormous bands of trap,  occurring in the form of dykes. These may often be traced for many miles,  and almost invariably follow a direction from east to west, rising vertically  through the hills that they traverse. The trap rock is very hard, and in  consequence often forms the backbone of lofty ridges of gneissic formation.  
The formation also consists of conglomerates, and sandstones altered  into quartzites, with limestone and volcanic rocks. Near the southern base  of the Tirupati Hills, which resemble those of Nagari, has been found an  extensive bed of soft sandstone, or freestone, several hundred feet in thickness,  and running in a north westerly direction for two or three miles. The stone  is remarkably like the freestone which occurs on the borders of coal fields.  
To these formations may be added the laterite beds of Kalahasti. This  part of the area forms a detached portion near the sea coast, and its geological  features resemble those of the neighbourhood of Madras. The soil consists  of red clayey conglomerates, gravels, and sands, the first predominating.  The conglomerate is of a coarse kind, containing numerous quartzite stones,  waterworn and smooth. The embedded stones are large and numerous in  the neighbourhood of the Nagari rocks, but decrease in size and number  as the distance from those hills increases, till near the coast they are mere  casual pebbles. The laterite when first dug is comparatively soft, but hardens  on exposure to the air, forming an excellent material for revetting tanks or  wells, building houses, or enclosing fields.  
The remarkable and highly picturesque scenery which a pilgrim sees during  various points in ascent is due to the great mural scarps into which the massive  quartzite beds have been worn. The quartzites are generally very massive  and semivitreous in texture, and occur in thick beds, which often show but  little lamination. The prevalent colours of the quartzites are pale greys and  drabs all weathering to shades of buff or pale orange The principal lines  of scarp face the south. In places we find bare walls standing vertically  
The Tirumala hills are composed essentially of sedimentary rocks-Quartzites with intercalated shales, which are given the geological, stratigraphical  nomenclature of Nagari Quartzite. These quartzites rest directly on the  granites and gneisses which form the lower parts of Tirumala hill ranges of  South and West and also constitute the rocks of the minor and major hills  South and West of Tirumala. This Nagari Quartzite forms a part of a major  geological basin ( depositional basin) known as the Cuddapah basin, whose  rocks extend for a large semicircular region, up to Dronachalam in the West,  beyond Srisailam in the North, Jaggayyapeta in the Northeast, and with the hill  ranges of Velikonda along Vinukonda, Udayagiri and Venkatagiri, forming  the eastern margin of the basin. While the granites and gneisses with intrusive  dolerite etc., which form the basement for the basin, are about 2,500 million  years old, the oldest formation of the Cuddapah basin are approximately  1,700 million years old and among them the Nagari Quartzites which are  slightly younger are about 1,500 million years old. This long time gap  between the basement and sedimentary rocks in this region, represented by the  basal conglomerate, is called the Eparchaean Unconformity. This feature was  recently highlighted by the Geological Survey of India by setting up a selected  spot at the base of sedimentary rocks near Tirumala, as a National Geological  Monument. That is located at the 18th km on the new ghat road at the  point where the road reaches the plateau top.  
The Nagari Quartzite whose base is very near the top of the Tirumala  hills at Tirupati, gradually comes down, as the boundary is traced eastwards  and reaches the valley level at the foot of the hills near Kapilathirtham and  goes below ground level further east.  
The granites and gneisses as well as the Nagari Quartzite are cut by several major faults i.e. dislocation of the formation along more or less straight lines and displacement of the block relative to each other on either side of  the plane of disturbance. One such fault runs in SSW-NNE direction  passing right through the Tirumala temple area. Another runs in WSW ENE direction passing through the Avachari vanka. Another major fault  running EW is inferred along the foot of the hills North of Tirupati passing  further east through Karkambadi and Erpedu. The fault zones are usually  locales of seepage of water. The fault at Tirumala has evidently helped in  localising the water sources in the Tirumala-Tirupati area.  
The top parts of the hills of Nagari, Narayanavanam etc. situated in the  area between Swarnamukhi and Arni rivers between Kalahasthi and Puttur at  the east and southeast of Tirupati, are composed of the same formation, i.e.  Nagari Quartzite; while the lower parts of bills and valleys are composed of  granites and gneisses. The depositional limits of the Cuddapah basin rocks  extend considerably to the South and Southeast of Tirumala-Tirupati area,  and the rocks exposed in the hills of Nagari and Narayanavanam are now  isolated by faulting and erosion.  
While the hill ranges of the Tirumala form vertical cliffs, the hills of  granites and gneisses are ranged to a large extent. This is because of the  difference in the nature of the rocks. While the quartzites are gently sloping,  bedded rocks, where the vertical jointing has resulted in the formation of  cliff's, the granites and gneisses are large masses, whose uniform nature has  resulted in different types of mounds. Moreover, the granites are more easily  weathered and eroded than the quartzites, which are resistant to chemical  weathering. Thus in many areas the quartzites have formed a protective  cover on the granites and prevented their complete erosion.  
The agents of erosion have carved a 'Natural Arch' in the Nagari  Quartzite, in the area northwest of Tirumala Temple. This is a gift of nature  to the Shrine of Lord Venkatesvara. This is interesting to a layman  and important to a scientist. Hence, this rare gift of nature is to be  preserved as a National Monument.  
The faulting as well as the folding of the rocks further east of Tirumala area, has deformed them into faulted structures, anticlines and synclines and formation of linear hill ranges. In contrast, the western part of Tirumala and further northwest where the rocks are only tilted and faulted retain  their general slopes and are widespread.  
(x) Minerals  
Among the gneissic hills, iron ore of Dharwarian age in the form of  hematite is found in considerable quantities and is in some places, exported.  The product is poor in quality and the percentage of iron is less than 60%,  Steatite barytes, gold and lead are found in small quantities in the area. Copper  mines, once profitably worked in the Kalahasti Zamindari, have long been  abandoned.  
(xi) Flora.  
The flora of the tract is a measure of the general state of its progress  on the whole, although the ecological succession is rather hampered by biotic  influences mostly. In spite of the heavy influence of a biotic nature the district  still presents unique flora to a botanical explorer. The climate, topography  and geology have played a great role in presenting the flora of the tract. The  climate is on the whole salubrious.  
The gneissic formations occurring in Seshachalam and Tirupati Hills,  mostly carry the red sanders forests with its associates, the plateau portions  sandal, and the plain areas dry deciduous forests. In the Chamala, Mamandur  and Talakona Valleys, soil depth is more, and dry evergreen vegetation occurs.  In the crevices of rocks, Ficus species and other epiphytic species come up,  which help  in the process of breaking up of the rocks and their eventual  disintegration.  
The rest of the country-side outside the hill ranges, i.e., the Reserve  Forest areas, presents a dry undulating landscape, more so in the western  upland taluks without crops of granite and quartzites. In between the uplands,  one comes across depressions caused by the numerous nallas that drain into  Bahuda, Satyavathi, Pincha, Palar, Swamamukhi, Kalyani, Talakona, Kusasthali,  Neeva etc. Often these streams are bundled to form small tanks from the  catchment area downwards under whose ayacut wet crops like paddy (Oriza  sativa) is sown. Along these wet fields and depressions one comes across  green patches of mesophytic type of flora like Syzygium cuminii, Pongamia  glabra and large trees of Terminalia arjuna. One also finds large trees of  mango (Mangifera indica) which are often planted, Phoenix sylvestris and a  number of grasses along water courses. The district is rich with tamarind  (Tamarindus indica) trees which are found along highways and in village  area; but most of them are now being cleared to get the areas under plough and for widening the roads and they are getting isolated and scattered on  private and government lands as silent witnesses to the capacity of the land.  
(xii) Forest.  
Forests cover about 27.4 % of the total extent of the area of the Chittoor  district in which Tirumala lies. In view of conserving and increasing the  land under forests the Government has taken over several estate forest blocks  paying due compensations during the past one decade.  
The floristic composition in the forests vary from dry mixed deciduous  to thorny scrub with occasional patches of dry evergreen growth and can  be assumed to have reached the climatic climax of the region. The forests  of Bhakarapet and Tirupati Ranges and these in their vicinity, mainly confined  to imposing Seshachalam hills were assumed to be part of Dandakaranya  of antiquity, as expounded in the famous epic Ramayana. Dandakaranya,  as implied in its name, was impregnable and was replete with a great variety  of birds and animals, besides its luxuriant and varied vegetative forms. Such  remarkable vanams are too far deteriorated physically, as to be easily  reclaimable, and in fact, tending to be an assemblage of bald and barren  mountains and hills.  
The principal natural factors influencing the floristic composition and  its distribution are the locality factors inclusive of biotic factors The forests  of the tract present considerable variations in altitude, and these elevational  variations naturally entail local variations in soil moisture and climate and  influence the growth of the vegetation to some degree or other. The biotic  factors are manifested by fires, thefts, overgrazing and cultivation. The  frequency and intensity of fires have a direct bearing on the aspect and altitude  and they largely influence the composition of the forests at least in the ground  cover and lower canopy as crown fires are almost nil in the region.  
The plateau forests are confined wholly to the high level plateau near  Tirumala and to places above the escarpment of Seshachalam hills in Bhakarapet  range. In a typical forest of this zone Engenia alternifolia forms nearly  80 percent of the crop. Shorea tumbaggaia is practically confined to the  hillocks and ridges, while Shorea talura is confined to more moist localities.  The associates of the above species are Terminalia Pallida, Buchanania  latifolia, Buchanania angustifolia.  
Besides the natural and endemic species a number of exotic species have  been introduced by the forest department in plantations and afforestation schemes of the degraded areas. Notable among these species are Eucalyptus  hybrid, Dalbergia sissco, Cassia Siamea, Prosopis cineraria, Acacia auriculiformes, Acacia senegal and Tecoma undulata. Many exotic species notably  Guhmohar (Delonix regia ), Peltophorum ferrugineum, Millingtonia hortensis,  Grevillia robusta (silver oak) planted on some avenues and in some institutional compounds are coming up well. Avenues of neem and tamarind  are of common occurrence.  
(xiii) Fauna.  
The forests of the district, especially those of Tirupati and Bhakarapet  ranges even before their reservation, were reported to be rich, both in flora  and fauna. Legions of birds and animals were reported to have found in them a good abode and lived an unbridled and poised life. Mr. Jean Baptiste Travernier a French traveller and jewel merchant who passed through these forests on 27-8-1652 has written in his chronicles that the "place  is very pleasant and derives its coolness from numerous streams and fountains "  and that elephant capturing operations were then being conducted in these  hills by one of the captains of Mir Jumla's army. This may appear rather  difficult to believe to those acquainted with the present condition of the forests and the fauna existing therein now, but it may not be far from truth, if we  can visualize the amount of havoc which could have been caused by man  to the once dense forests during the past three centuries. Not only have the  big game like elephants, bison etc , disappeared, but even carnivora like tigers and panthers, not to speak of Cheetahs, are greatly depleted and  almost extinct. Other common forms of wild life such as sambhurs and  spotted deers are also frightfully reduced and one rarely sees them in herds.  The opening of extensive unreserves around all forest reserves for cultivation, forming new highways passing through or along Nagapatla, Bhakarapet,  Tirupati, Mamandur and Napier RF. and the advent of fast moving vehicles  and the jeeps that can cruise the rugged forest tracts, the proliferation of  unlicensed weapons and coming of cheap and poisonous poison drugs like  endrine etc , and man's unsportive desire for ruthless destruction of wild  beasts, have all cumulatively contributed to the present sad state of affairs  of reduction in the rate and varied fauna in the forests. Today even the  harmless peacocks are reduced in numbers. To give the much harassed  wild life a chance to recoup, all the forests in the district were closed to shooting  from 1962.  
The incidence of horned game is much in Tirupati ranges where the locality  factors are quite congenial for their living.  
(xiv) Birds  
The bird life in general may be considered to be in much better shape  in the tract as the poachers had not concentrated much in their destruction  and the birds protecting themselves better by their flight and smallness in  size than quadrupeds. A number of species exist in the tract whose number  swells in the winter by swarms of migratory birds. Among the Babblers, the  Large Grey Babbler (Tindoides malcolmi) is the common one. The Shrikes,  like the Large Grey Shrike (Lanis excubitor), can be seen hawking insects among the main highways in the district and help to keep down the insect  population that crop-up during and after rains. The king-crow, Mynas  and Crows are always attendant on cattle snapping up insects. These and a  host of other birds like the Warblers, Bee-eaters, Hoopoes, Swifts etc., all  help in keeping down the insect population which would otherwise cause  untold harm to the crops. Vultures like the White-Breasted and Long-billed  keep the countryside clean of carcasses and are to be found practically all  over the area. The other predatory birds are the Eagles, Kites and owls  which keep the rodent population under check. Among the game birds,  mention may be made of Sandgrouse, Quails, Partridges, green pigeons and pigeons, which are trapped by local villagers and Yenadis. A large number  of water fowl visit the numerous tanks in the district in the winter season.  Mentions may be made of various ducks like spot-bills, pintails and pochards.  The Chinnagottigallu tank in winter is always found with these ducks. Among  the teals, the whistling teals are found in all seasons while the cotton and  Blue-winged teals are found in other seasons. The paddy fields attract a number of Herons and Egrets at all times. The peacock (Pavo cristatus)  is present still in Tirupati, Bhakarapet, Madanapalli and Palamaner Ranges,  and quite often it may be seen crossing the Tirumala ghat road in the evening  between the 6th and 7th mile. Parakeets, grey jungle fowls, and Weaver birds are also found in plenty in all the class-I reserves in the district.  
(xv) Reptiles.  
A number of poisonous as well as non-poisonous snakes are found in  the district. Most common among the poisonous are the cobra which is often  revered by Hindus and milk offered into the anthills during Nagulachavithi  festival. Russell's viper (Vipera russelli) and Krait (Bungarus fasciatus) are also common in the area. The python (Python molurus) is reported to be  present in the interior Class-I forests though it is seldom seen: The other  non-poisonous snakes like rat snake (Ptyas mucosa), sand boa (Eryx johni), the Green snake (Tropidonotus stolatus), water snake (Tropidonus coton)  etc., are to be found commonly in and around the villages performing the  very useful function of keeping down the rodent population.  
Among the common Lacertilia (Lizards), mention may be made of the  Monitor lizard (Varanus griseus: Telugu-Udumu). Geckos(Hemidactylus frenatus-Telugu-Nalkisi) and wall-lizards as well as the common garden  lizard (Calotes versicolor : Telugu-Tondaki) are the usual sights.  
Among the tortoises, mention may be made of the soft shelled tortoise and the common tortoise which occur not only in rivers and streams but  also in numerous wells and ponds. The starred Tortoise (Testudo elegans)  is also found in the tract. It is a land-dweller and seeks the shelter of rocks  where on account of its pattern it blends well with the bouldery surface.  
A variety of fish are also found in the several rivers, streams, reservoirs  and tanks in the district.
